package Dancer2::DeprecationPolicy; # ABSTRACT: Define the process by which
outdated, broken, or unused code from Dancer2

=encoding UTF-8

=head1 DESCRIPTION

While there are conflicting ideas about deprecation, in Dancer2, deprecated
code is code that:

=over

=item * Is in the way of implementing important features or fixes that provide
more value.

=item * Has a negative impact on the integrity and security of user code,
whether by misusing it to not.

=item * Provides a negative experience for the users.

=back

Deprecated code is code we either had to write and can now remove or we thought
was a good idea and were wrong. It is code that doesn't overall benefit users
or the developers.

Deprecated code is code that is marked for eventual removal and we do not
intend to keep in the Dancer2 codebase.

=head1 DEPRECATION PROCESS

=over

=item * Code to be deprecated is posted/discussed publicly (see below)

=item * Deprecated code enters soft deprecation phase

=item * After 12 months or 2 major releases, code is hard deprecated

=item * After 6 months or 1 major release, hard deprecated code is removed

=back

Deprecated code is marked with warnings and the version and/or date in which it
will no longer be available.

=head2 Public Notice

When a feature/code is to be deprecated, the Dancer Core Team will create a new
GitHub issue for the code/feature to be deprecated, and announce this in a
public manner (blog post, Twitter, and the mailing list, at minimum). The
notice should provide the reason for the deprecation, what Dancer2/the
community is gaining as a result of the deprecation, and what the officially
recognized alternative to the deprecated code is.

The public notice period will provide the developer/user base an opportunity to
voice objections or provide feedback or alternatives to deprecation. It also
allows the Core Team to better assess the potential long range effects of
deprecation.

While the deprecated feature/code can be discussed by community, the decision
will be ultimately made by the Dancer Core Team. There is no definitive time
for the public notice period to end; some deprecations are more urgent than
others, and each situation is left to the discretion of the Core Team, with
feedback from the community.

=head2 Soft Deprecation

When code is soft deprecated, a warning will be thrown to indicate that the
code is to be considered deprecated. Apps will continue to function normally
otherwise.

=head2 Hard Deprecation

After 12 months or two major releases (whichever comes first), the code is
considered to be hard deprecated. An error will continue to be thrown, but
unlike soft deprecation, continued usage of the deprecated code will cause the
application to die.

There is one caveat to this: code will B<never> be deprecated for less than 6
months. So if we deprecate code after v0.500000, become unusually productive,
and produce Dancer 0.600000 and 0.700000 in a two month timeframe, no
deprecated code will be removed because 6 months hasn't elapsed.

=head2 Removal

Six months following hard deprecation, or one major release after hard
deprecation, the deprecated code is removed from Dancer2.

=head1 EXCEPTIONS

In special cases, based on community feedback, these timelines may be extended.
But we expect this to be a rare occurrence, at best.

=head1 PLUGINS

We strongly encourage (but cannot/do not require) plugin authors to adopt the
same policy.
