package Dancer2::Policy;
# ABSTRACT: Dancer core and community policy and standards of conduct

use strict;
use warnings;

1;

__END__

=pod

=encoding utf8

=head1 DESCRIPTION

This document describes various policies (most notably, the standards
of conduct) for the Dancer core developers and broad community.

This is what we expect from our community and ourselves and these are
the standards of behavior we set forth in order to make sure the community
stays a safe space for all of its members, without exception.

=head1 STANDARDS OF CONDUCT

These standards apply in any context in which the community comes
together as a community. This includes, but is not limited to, the
Dancer IRC channel, the Dancer mailing list, Dancer hackathons, and
Dancer conferences.

=over 4

=item *

Always be civil.

=item *

Heed the moderators.

=item *

Abuse is not tolerated.

=back

Civility is simple: stick to the facts while avoiding demeaning remarks and
sarcasm. It is not enough to be factual. You must also be civil. Responding
in kind to incivility is not acceptable.

If the list moderators tell you that you are not being civil, carefully
consider how your words have appeared before responding in any way. You may
protest, but repeated protest in the face of a repeatedly reaffirmed decision
is not acceptable.

Unacceptable behavior will result in a public and clearly identified warning.
Repeated unacceptable behavior will result in removal from the mailing list and
revocation of any commit bit. The first removal is for one month. Subsequent
removals will double in length. After six months with no warning, a user's ban
length is reset. Removals, like warnings, are public.

The list of moderators consists of all active core developers. This includes,
in alphabetical order, Alberto Simões, David Precious, Mickey Nasriachi,
Russell Jenkins, Sawyer X, Stefan Hornburg (Racke), Steven Humphrey, and Yanick
Champoux.

This list might additionally grow to active members of the community who have
stepped up to help handle abusive behavior. If this should happen, this
document would be updated to include their names.

Additionally, it's important to understand the self-regulating nature we
foster at the Dancer community. This means anyone and everyone in the
community - in the channel, on the list, at an event - has the ability to
call you up on your behavior and your incivility to others in the community.

While it remains the responsibility of moderators to issue warnings and make
decisions, do not expect that they will be the only ones who make a note of
the way you treat others.

As a core principle, abuse is never tolerated. You cannot berate, insult,
debase, deride, put-down, or vilify anyone, or act towards anyone in a way
intending to hurt someone. This includes any attempts to otherize anyone,
whether by their gender, sexual orientation, or any other characteristic.

The community aims to provide a safe space for everyone, in any forum it
has. If you ever feel this has been compromised, please do contact the
moderators. We are always here. This is B<your> community, as much as it
is anyone else's.

=head1 CREDITS

This policy has been adopted and adapted from the policy available for
the Perl language development, provided by and on B<p5p> (the Perl 5
Porters).

The original inspiration policy document can be read at L<perlpolicy>.

